this is a tuberculosis ward and at the
time this picture was taken in the late
1800s one in seven of all people died
from tuberculosis we had no idea what
was causing this disease the hypothesis
was actually it was your Constitution
that made you susceptible and it was a
highly romanticized disease it was also
called consumption and it was the
disorder of poets and artists and
intellectuals and some people actually
thought it gave you heightened
sensitivity and conferred creative
genius by the 1950s we instead knew that
tuberculosis was caused by a highly
contagious bacterial infection which is
slightly less romantic but that had the
upside of us being able to maybe develop
drugs to treat it so doctors had
discovered a new drug
I promised ik might cure tuberculosis
and it gave it to patients and patients
were elated they were more social more
energetic one medical report actually
says they were dancing in the halls and
unfortunately this is not necessarily
because they were getting better one of
them were still dying
another medical report describes them as
being quote unquote inappropriately
happy and that is how the first
antidepressant was discovered so
accidental discovery is not uncommon in
science but it requires more than just a
happy accident you have to be able to
recognize it for discovery to occur and
as a neuroscientist I'm going to talk to
you a little bit about my first-hand
experience with whatever you want to
call the opposite of dumb luck let's
call it smart luck but first a bit more
background thankfully since the 1950s
we've developed some other drugs and we
can actually now cure tuberculosis and
at least in the United States though not
necessary
in other countries we've closed our
sanatoriums and probably most of you are
not too worried about TB but a lot of
what was true in the early 1900's about
is infectious disease we can say now
about psychiatric disorders we are in
the middle of an epidemic of mood
disorders like depression and
post-traumatic stress disorder or PTSD
one in four of all adults in the United
States suffers from mental illness which
means that if you have an experienced
personally or someone in your family
hasn't it's still very likely that
someone you know has though they may not
talk about it depression has actually
now suppressed hiv/aids malaria
diabetes and war as the leading cause of
disability worldwide and also like
tuberculosis in the 1950s we don't know
what causes it once it's developed it's
chronic
less is a lifetime and there are no
known cures the second antidepressant we
discovered also by accident in the 1950s
from an antihistamine that was making
people manic imipramine and in both the
case of the tuberculosis ward and the
antihistamine someone had to be able to
recognize that a drug that was designed
to do one thing treat tuberculosis or
suppress allergies could be used to do
something very different treat
depression and this sort of repurposing
is actually quite challenging when
doctors first saw this mood enhancing
effects of eye pranaya it they didn't
really recognize what they saw they were
so used to thinking about it from the
framework of being a tuberculosis drug
that they actually just listed it as a
side effect an adverse side effect as
you can see here a lot of these patients
in 1954 are experiencing severe euphoria
and they were worried that this might
somehow interfere with their recovering
from tuberculosis so they recommended
that I pranaya is I'd only be used in
cases of extreme TB and in patients that
were highly emotionally stable
which is of course the exact opposite of
how we use it as an antidepressant they
were so used to looking at it from the
perspective of this one disease they
could not see the larger implications
for another disease and to be fair
that's not entirely their fault
functional fixedness is this bias that
affects all of us it's a tendency to
only be able to think of an object in
terms of its traditional use or function
my mental set is another thing right
that's sort of this preconceived
framework with which we approach
problems and that actually makes
repurposing pretty hard for all of us
which is I guess why they gave a TV show
to the guy who was like really great at
repurposing so the effects in both the
case if I pronounced inanimate for me
that was so strong right it was mania or
people dancing in the halls it's
actually not that surprising they were
caught but it does make you wonder what
else we've missed so i pranaya didn't
before mean they're more than just a
case study and repurposing they have two
other things in common
that are really important one if
terrible side effects that includes
liver toxicity weight gain of over 50
pounds suicidality and - they both
increase levels of serotonin which is a
chemical signal in the brain or a
neurotransmitter and those two things
together right one or the two may not
have been that important the two
together meant that we had to develop
safer drugs and that serotonin seemed
like a pretty good place to start
so we developed drugs to more
specifically focus on serotonin the
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
so the SSRIs most famous of which is
prozac and that was 30 years ago and
since then we've mostly just worked on
optimizing those drugs and the SSRIs
they are better than the drugs that came
before them but they still have a lot of
side effects
including weight gain insomnia
suicidality and they take a really long
time to work something like four to six
weeks a lot of patients and that's in
the patients where they do work there
are a lot of patients where these drugs
don't work
and that means now in 2016 we still have
no cures for any mood disorders just
drugs its suppress symptoms which is
kind of the difference between taking a
painkiller for an infection versus an
antibiotic pink hair will make you feel
better
but it's not gonna do anything to treat
that underlying disease and it was this
flexibility right in our thinking that
let us recognize that I pranaya and
imipramine could be repurposed in this
way which led us to the serotonin
hypothesis which we then ironically
fixated on this is brain signaling
serotonin from an SSRI commercial in
case you're not clear this is a
dramatization and in science we try and
remove our bias right by running
double-blinded experiments or being
statistically agnostic as to what our
results will be
but bias creeps in more insidiously in
what we choose to study and how we
choose to study it so we focused on
serotonin now for the past 30 years
often to the exclusion of other things
you still have no cures and what if
serotonin isn't all there is to
depression what if it's not even the key
part of it that means no matter how much
time or money or effort that we put into
it it will never lead to a cure in the
past few years doctors have discovered
probably what is the first truly new
antidepressant since the SSRIs kalypso
and this drug works very quickly within
a few hours or a day and it doesn't work
on serotonin it works on glutamate which
is another neurotransmitter and it's
also repurposed it was traditionally
used as anaesthesia in surgery but
unlike those other drugs which were
recognized pretty quickly it took us 20
years to realize that Calypso was an
antidepressant despite the fact that I
actually a better antidepressant
probably than those other drugs it's
actually probably because of the fact
that it is a better antidepressant that
it was harder for us to recognize
there's no mania to signal its effects
so in 2013 up at Columbia University I
was working with my colleague dr.
Christian and Denny and we were studying
clips
as an antidepressant in mice and calypso
has like a really short half-life which
means it's out of your body within a few
hours and we were just piloting so we
would give an injection to mice and then
we'd wait a week and then we'd run
another experiments to save money and
one of the experiments I was running we
would stress the mice and we use that as
a model of depression and at first it
kind of just looked like it didn't
really work at all so we could have
stopped there but I have run this model
of depression for years and the data
just looked kind of weird it didn't
really look right to me so I went back
and we reanalyzed it based on whether or
not they had gotten that one injection
of Clips all a week beforehand and it
looked kind of like this so if you look
at the far left right if you put a mouse
in a new space this is a box it's very
exciting a mouse will walk around and
explore and you can see that pink line
is actually the measure of them walking
and we also give it another Mouse in a
pencil Cup that it can decide to
interact with this is also a
dramatization in case that's not clear
and a normal Mouse will explore it will
be social check out what's going on if
you stress a mouse in the suppression
model which is the middle box
they aren't social they don't explore
they mostly just kind of hide in that
back corner behind a cup yet the mice
that had gotten that one injection of
Clips all here on your right they were
exploring they were social they looked
like they had never been stressed at all
which is impossible so we could have
just stopped there but Christine had
also used clips all before as anesthesia
and a few years ago she had seen that it
seemed to have some weird effects on
cells and some other behavior that also
seems to last long after the drug maybe
a few weeks so we're like okay maybe
this is not completely impossible but
we're really skeptical so we did what
you do in science when you're not sure
and we ran it again and I remember being
in the animal room moving mice from box
to box to test them and Christine was
actually
sitting on the floor with a computer in
her lap so you know the mice couldn't
see her and she would analyzing the data
in real time and I remember us yelling
which you're not supposed to do in an
animal room where you're testing because
it had worked it seemed like these mice
were protected against stress or they
were inappropriately happy however you
want to call it and we were really
excited and then we were really
skeptical because it was too good to be
true so we ran it again and then we ran
it again in a PTSD model and we ran it
again in a physiological model where all
we did was give stress hormones and we
had our undergrads run it and then we
had our collaborators halfway across the
world in France run it and every time
someone ran it they confirmed the same
thing it seemed like this one injection
of collapse all was somehow protecting
against stress for weeks and we only
published this a year ago but since then
other labs have also independently
confirmed this effect so we don't know
what causes depression but we do know
that stress is the initial trigger in
80% of cases and depression and PTSD are
different diseases but this is something
they share in common right it is
traumatic stress like active combat or
natural disasters or community violence
or sexual assaults that causes
post-traumatic stress disorder and not
everyone that is exposed to stress
develops a mood disorder and this
ability to experience stress and be
resilient and backed about bounce back
and not develop depression or PTSD is
known as stress resilience and it varies
between people and we have always
thought of it as just sort of this
passive property right it's the absence
of susceptibility factors and risk
factors for these disorders but what if
it were active maybe we could enhance it
sort of akin to putting on armor we had
accidentally discovered the first
resilience enhancing drug and like I
said we only gave a tiny amount of drug
and it lasted for weeks and that's not
like anything you see with
antidepressants but it is actually kind
of similar to what you see in immune vac
seats so in immune vaccines right you'll
get your shots and then you know weeks
months years later when you're actually
exposed to bacteria it's not the vaccine
in your body that protects you is your
own immune system that's developed
resistance and resilience to this
bacteria that fights it off and you
actually never get the infection which
is very different from say our
treatments right in that case you get
the infection you expose the bacteria
you're sick and then you take say an
antibiotic which cures it and those
drugs are actually working to kill the
bacteria or similar to as I said before
right with this palliative you'll take
something that will suppress the
symptoms but it won't treat the
underlying infection and you'll only
feel better during the time in which
you're taking it which is why you have
to keep taking it and in depression
right and PTSD here we have your stress
exposure we only have palliative care
antidepressants only suppress symptoms
and that is why you basically have to
keep taking them for the life of the
disease which is often the length of
your own life so we're calling our
resilience enhancing drugs para vaccines
which means vaccine like because it
seems like they might have the potential
to protect against stress and prevent
mice from developing depression and
post-traumatic stress disorder
also not all antidepressants are also
pair of vaccines
we tried prozac as well and that had no
effect so if this were to translate into
humans we might be able to protect
people who are predictably at risk
against stress induced disorders like
depression and PTSD so that's first
responders and firefighters refugees
prisoners and prison guards soldiers you
name it and to give you a sense of the
scale of these diseases in 2010 the
global burden of disease was estimated
at 2.5 trillion dollars and since they
are chronic that cost is compounding and
is therefore expected to rise up to six
trillion dollars in just the next 15
years
as I mentioned before repurposing can be
challenging because of our prior biases
cliff Saul has another name ketamine
which also goes by another name Special
K which is a club drug and drug of abuse
it's still used across the world as an
anesthetic it's used in children we use
it on the battlefield it's actually the
drug of choice in a lot of developing
nations because it doesn't affect
breathing it is on the World Health
Organization lists of most essential
medicines if we had discovered ketamine
as a pair of vaccine first it'd be
pretty easy for us to develop it but as
is we have to compete with our
functional fixedness and mental sets
that kind of interfere fortunately it's
not the only compound we have discovered
that has these prophylactic para vaccine
qualities but all of the other drugs
we've discovered or compounds if you go
there totally new they have to go
through the entire FDA approval process
if they make it before they can ever be
used in humans and that will be years so
if we wanted something sooner ketamine
is already FDA approved it's generic
it's available we could develop it for a
fraction of a price and a fraction of
the time but actually beyond functional
fixedness and mental set there's a real
other challenge to repurposing drugs
which is policy there are no incentives
in place once a drug is generic and off
patent and no longer exclusive to
encourage pharma companies to develop
them because they don't make money and
that's not true for just ketamine that
is true for all drugs regardless the
idea itself is completely novel in
psychiatry to use drugs to prevent
mental illness as opposed to just treat
it it is possible that 20 50 100 years
from now we will look back now at
depression and PTSD the way we look back
at tuberculosis sanitarium
as a thing of the past this could be the
beginning of the ends of the mental
health epidemic but as a great scientist
once said only a fool is sure of
anything the wise man keeps on guessing
[Applause]